# 10.2 UTP and UniPro Specific Overview

UTP will deliver commands, data and responses as standard message packets (T_SDU) over the UniPro network.

The UFS transactions will be grouped into data structures called UFS Protocol Information Units (UPIU). There are UPIU's defined for UFS SCSI commands, responses, data in and data out, task management, utility functions, vendor functions, transaction synchronization and control. The list is extensible for future additions.

For enumeration and configuration, UFS supports a system of Descriptors, Attributes and Flags that define and control the specifics of the device, including operating characteristics, interfaces, number of logical units, operating speeds, power profiles, etc. The system is a hierarchical tree of related elements. It is open to be expanded.

## 10.2.1 Phases

The SCSI based Command protocol requires that the UPIU packets follow the transitions required to execute a command. Briefly, a command execution requires the sending of a COMMAND UPIU, zero or more DATA IN UPIU or DATA OUT UPIU packets and terminates with a RESPONSE UPIU that contains the status.

## 10.2.2 Data Pacing

A device may have limited memory resources for buffering or limited processing throughput. During a Command that requires a large Data Out transaction the Target device can pace the Data Out phase by sending a READY TO TRANSFER UPIU when it is ready for the next DATA OUT UPIU. In addition, the READY TO TRANSFER UPIU contains an embedded transfer context that is used to initiate a DMA transfer on a per packet basis at the host.

During the Data In phase, no READY TO TRANSFER UPIU is required as the host has the ability to specify the size of the Data In transfer and thereby is able to allocate in advance the appropriate memory resources for the incoming data. A device issued DATA IN UPIU packet also contains an embedded DMA context that can be used to initiate a DMA transfer on a per packet basis.

## 10.2.3 UniPro

In keeping with the requirements of the UniPro Protocol the UFS Initiator device and Target device will divide its transactions into UniPro messages that will contain UPIU's. UniPro messages can handle T_SDU messages of theoretically unlimited size. UFS will impose a practicable limit on the maximum T_SDU message size. The limit is 65600 bytes which includes UPIU header, optional extended headers area and data segment. The minimum message size is determined by the basic header format, which is 32 bytes. There is a possibility that in the future this value will increase to allow a larger data segment area.

# 10.3 UFS Transport Protocol Transactions Overview

UFS transactions consist of packets called UFS Protocol Information Units (UPIU) that travel between devices on the UniPro bus. A transaction begins between an Initiator device and a Target device in the form of a Request-Response operation. The Initiator device starts the sequence of transactions by sending a request to a Target device and logical unit. The Target device will then respond with a series of transactions that eventually end in a response transaction.

---
JEDEC Standard No. 220G
Page 70

# JEDEC Standard No. 220G
Page 71

## 10.3 UFS Transport Protocol Transactions Overview (cont'd)

All UFS UPIU's consist of a single basic header segment, transaction specific fields, possibly one or more extended header segments and zero or more data segments.

A basic header segment has a fixed length of 12 bytes. The minimum UPIU size is 32 bytes which includes a basic header segment and transaction specific fields.

The maximum UPIU size is defined as being 65600 bytes.

The UPIU format is flexible enough to be easily extended to support future transactions and larger data segments and will allow the application of this protocol to network protocols other than UniPro.

## 10.4 Service Delivery Subsystem

The Service Delivery Subsystem is an I/O system that transmits service requests and responses between Initiator devices and the Target device connected via a physical or logical bus. The UFS UTP attempts to define a protocol that is independent of the Service Delivery Subsystem. This will allow for the easy porting of UTP to different Service Delivery Subsystems.

Currently, UFS is using the MIPI UniPro bus and the MIPI M-PHY® as the Service Delivery Subsystem. For convenience and to aid the reader understanding, portions of this standard directly reference UniPro and M-PHY®. Regardless of these references, the UTP protocol is independent of the Service Delivery Subsystem and should be able to port to other I/O systems.

UPIU structures will be handed off to MIPI UniPro as UniPro Service Data Units (T_SDU). Currently, the UniPro T_SDU requires no additional headers or trailer wrapped around the UPIU structure. This means that the T_SDU size will be exactly the UPIU size. The minimum size T_SDU will be 32 bytes. The maximum T_SDU size will be 65600 bytes.

## 10.5 UPIU Transactions

Every UPIU data structure contains a Transaction Code. This code defines the content and implied function or use of the UPIU data structure. Table 10.1 lists currently defined transaction codes.

### Table 10.1 — UPIU Transaction Codes

| Initiator To Target | Transaction Code | Target to Initiator | Transaction Code |
|-------------------|------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| NOP OUT | 00 0000b | NOP IN | 10 0000b |
| COMMAND | 00 0001b | RESPONSE | 10 0001b |
| DATA OUT | 00 0010b | DATA IN | 10 0010b |
| TASK MANAGEMENT REQUEST | 00 0100b | TASK MANAGEMENT RESPONSE | 10 0100b |
| Reserved | 01 0001b | READY TO TRANSFER | 11 0001b |
| QUERY REQUEST | 01 0110b | QUERY RESPONSE | 11 0110b |
| Reserved | 01 1111b | REJECT UPIU | 11 1111b |
| Reserved | Others | Reserved | Others |

NOTE 1   Bit 5 of the Transaction Code indicates the direction of flow and the originator of the UPIU: when equal '0' the originator is the Initiator device, when equal '1' the originator is the Target device.

# 10.5 UPIU Transactions (cont'd)

## Table 10.2 — UPIU Transaction Code Definitions

| UPIU Data Structure | Description |
|-------------------|-------------|
| NOP Out | The NOP Out transaction acts as a ping from an initiator device to a target device. It can be used to check for a connection path to a device. |
| NOP In | The NOP In transaction is a target response to an initiator device when responding to a NOP Out request. |
| Command | The Command transaction originates in the Initiator device and is sent to a logical unit within a Target device. A COMMAND UPIU will contain a Command Descriptor Block as the command and the command parameters. This represents the COMMAND phase of the command. |
| Response | The Response transaction originates in the Target device and is sent back to the Initiator device. A RESPONSE UPIU will contain a command specific operation status and other response information. This represents the STATUS phase of the command. |
| Data Out | The Data Out transaction originates in the Initiator device and is used to send data from the Initiator device to the Target device. This represents the DATA OUT phase of a command. |
| Data In | The Data In transaction originates in the Target device and is used to send data from the Target to the Initiator device. This represents the DATA IN phase of a command. |
| Task Management Request | This transaction type carries SCSI Architecture Model (SAM) task management function requests originating at the Initiator device and terminating at the Target device. The standard functions are defined by [SAM]. |
| Task Management Response | This transaction type carries SCSI Architecture Model (SAM) task management function responses originating in the Target device and terminating at the Initiator device. |
| Ready To Transfer | The Target device will send a Ready To Transfer transaction when it is ready to receive the next DATA OUT UPIU and has sufficient buffer space to receive the data. The Target device can send multiple Ready To Transfer UPIU if it has buffer space to receive multiple DATA OUT UPIU packets. The READY TO TRANSFER UPIU contains a DMA context and can be used to setup and trigger a DMA action within a host controller. |
| Query Request | This transaction originates in the Initiator device and is used to request descriptor data from the Target device. This transaction is defined outside of the Command and Task Management functions and is defined exclusively by UFS. |
| Query Response | This transaction originates in the Target device and provides requested descriptor information to the Initiator device in response of the Query Request transaction. This transaction is defined outside of the Command and Task Management functions and is defined exclusively by UFS. |
| Reject | The Reject transaction originates in the Target device and is sent back to the Initiator device. A REJECT UPIU is generated when Target device is not able to interpret and/or execute a UPIU received from the Initiator device due to wrong values in some of its fields. |

UFS devices are able to process only either a NOP OUT or a QUERY REQUEST at any point of time.

---

JEDEC Standard No. 220G  
Page 72

# 10.6 General UFS Protocol Information Unit Format

Table 10.3 represents the general structure of a UPIU. All UPIU's will contain a fixed size and location basic header and additional fields as required to support the transaction type.

## Table 10.3 — General Format of the UFS Protocol Information Unit

**General UPIU Format**

| 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 |
|---|---|---|---|
| Transaction Type | Flags | LUN | Task Tag |
| **4** | **5** | **6** | **7** |
| IID | Command Set Type | EXT_IID / Query Function / Task Manag. Function | Response | EXT_IID / Status |
| **8** | **9** | **10** | **11** |
| Total EHS Length | Device Information | (MSB) | (LSB) |
| | | Data Segment Length | |
| **12** | **13** | **14** | **15** |
| | | | |
| **16** | | | **19** |
| | | | |
| **20** | Transaction Specific Fields | | **23** |
| | | | |
| **24** | | | **27** |
| | | | |
| **28** | | | **31** |
| | | | |
| **i** | **i+1** | **i+2** | **i+3** |
| | Extra Header Segment (EHS) 1 | | |
| | **...** | | |
| **j** | **j+1** | **j+2** | **j+3** |
| | Extra Header Segment (EHS) N | | |
| Header E2ECRC (omit if HD=0) |
| Data Segment |
| Data E2ECRC (omit if DD=0) |

**NOTE 1** Extra Header Segments shall be supported only for COMMAND UPIU and RESPONSE UPIU, therefore the Total EHS Length may be set to a value greater than zero in COMMAND UPIU and RESPONSE UPIU, while it shall be set to zero in all other UPIU.

**NOTE 2** EXT_IID is defined in byte 7 for host to device UPIUs (COMMAND, DATA OUT, TASK MANAGEMENT REQUEST). EXT_IID is defined in byte 5 for device to host UPIUs (RESPONSE, DATA IN, RTT, TASK MANAGEMENT RESPONSE, REJECT).

---
JEDEC Standard No. 220G  
Page 73